#summary Database Query Mappings

= Introduction =

Ada Database Objects provides a small framework which helps in
using complex SQL queries in an application.  
externalize the possibly complex SQL requests of an application
in an external file and map the result of those queries directly in
an Ada record.  The benefit of this mechanism are the following:

* It is easy to change or tune an SQL query without re-building the application
* Get the result of SQL queries directly in Ada records
* Write an application that does not depend on the database


* The XML query file defines a mapping that represents the result of SQL queries,
* The XML mapping is used by [http://code.google.com/p/ada-gen Dynamo] to generate an Ada record,
* The XML query file also defines a set of SQL queries, each query being identified by a unique name,
* The XML query file is read by the application to obtain the SQL query associated with a query name.

= XML Query File and Mapping =

== XML Query File ==

The XML query file must use the `query-mapping` root element.  It should
define at most one `class` mapping and several `query` definitions.
The `class` definition should come first before any `query` definition.
{{{
<query-mapping>
   <class>...</class>
   <query>...</query>
</query-mapping>
}}}

== SQL Result Mapping ==

The XML query mapping is very close to the database table mapping.
The difference is that there is no need to specify and table name
nor any SQL type.  The XML query mapping is used to build an Ada
record that correspond to query results.  Unlike the database table mapping,
the Ada record will not be tagged and its definition will expose all the record members directly.

The following XML query mapping:

{{{
<query-mapping>
   <class name='Samples.Model.User_Info'>
      <property name="name" type="String">
         <comment>the user name</comment>
         <type name="String"/>
      </property>
      <property name="email" type="String">
         <comment>the email address</comment>
      </property>
   </class>
</query-mapping>
}}}

will generate the following Ada record:

{{{
package Samples.Model is
   type User_Info is record
     Name  : Unbounded_String;
     Email : Unbounded_String;
   end record;
end Samples.Model;
}}}

The same query mapping can be used by different queries.

== SQL Queries ==

The XML query file defines a list of SQL queries that the application
can use.  Each query is associated with a unique name.  The application
will use that name to identify the SQL query to execute.  For each query,
the file also describes the SQL query pattern that must be used for
the query execution.


{{{
<query name='xxx' class='Samples.Model.User_Info'>
   <sql driver='mysql'>
      select u.name, u.email from user u
   </sql>
   <sql driver='sqlite'>
      ...
   </sql>
   <sql-count driver='mysql'>
      select count(*) from user u
   </sql-count>
</query>
}}}
